# State of Valhalla
## Part 3: The JVM Model {.subtitle}

#### John Rose and Brian Goetz {.author}
#### December 2021 {.date}

> _This is the third of three documents describing the current State of
  Valhalla.  The first is [The Road to Valhalla](01-background); the
  second is [The Language Model](02-object-model)._


This document describes the _Java Virtual Machine_ view of value classes.  Note
that this is not necessarily the same as the Java Language view; readers are
advised to exercise care in drawing conclusions, from this document, about the
Java Language.

## Value classes and objects

Prior to Valhalla, all objects -- instances of classes and arrays -- had a
unique _object identity_.  Valhalla allows classes to choose, by marking a class
with the `ACC_VALUE` flag, whether their instances have identity ("identity
classes") or not ("value classes").  Instances of value classes are called
_value objects_.

Whether an object is an identity object or value object is also reflected in the
dynamic type system: Identity objects are instances of
`java.lang.IdentityObject`, and value objects are instances of
`java.lang.ValueObject`.  (The JVM will ensure this by injecting these
interfaces, if necessary, when concrete classes are loaded.)

As with identity objects, value objects are referred to through _object
references_.  For some value classes -- those which are additionally marked with
the `ACC_PRIMITIVE` flag -- values can also be described directly, as _bare
values_, outside of any object.  Such special value classes are called
"primitive classes".

Because the JVM knows that value objects do not have identity, it can more
effectively optimize layout, instantiation, member access, and calling
convention for value objects, whether they are represented via references
or as bare values.

### Carriers and descriptors

JVM type descriptors (JVMS 4.3.2) use a leading letter to denote their _basic
type_.  There are currently eight basic types corresponding to the eight
primitive types (`I`, `J`, etc), and one basic type corresponding to object
references (`L`).  (The letter `V` appears in method descriptors but is not
considered a type.)  The character `[` in type descriptors introduces an array
type that is hardwired to an internally defined array class, but for our
purposes it is a variation of the `L` syntax, introducing a special type of
object reference (which always refers to an identity object.)

These nine basic types map to five _carrier types_ -- int, long, float, double,
and object reference -- which correspond to the different kinds of values that
can be stored in a stack or local variable slot.  (We erase `byte`, `short`,
`char`, and `boolean` to `int`, using the `I` carrier and `i*` bytecodes for
these.)  The primitive carriers store a value directly in the stack or local
variable slot.  (Long and double values use two adjacent slots.) The object
reference (`L`) carrier stores an _object reference_, whether for an identity or
value object, in the corresponding slot.  (The slot can also hold the special
`null` reference which points to nothing at all.)

To describe bare values of primitive classes, we add a new basic type, the "`Q`
type".  A descriptor beginning with `Q` has the same syntactic structure as an
`L` descriptor (e.g., `QPoint;` for a primitive class `Point`).  Both
`Q`-carried and `L`-carried values can be operated on by the same set of `a*`
bytecodes.  The verifier ensures, however, that `Q`-carried and `L`-carried
values, even of the same class, are kept distinct.

`Q` types can be referred to from `CONSTANT_Class` item in the constant pool by
specifying a field descriptor for a `Q` descriptor as its `CONSTANT_Utf8`
string, rather than an internal binary name.  (As with array descriptors in the
same place, there is no ambiguity, since a class name cannot have the same
spelling as an array or class descriptor.  This is because class names cannot
contain left bracket `[` or semicolon `;` characters.)

It is an error to refer to a class using a `Q` descriptor which does not have
the `ACC_VALUE` and `ACC_PRIMITIVE` flags set because only primitive classes
support bare values.  Any class may be referred to using an `L` descriptor.  (In
particular, there is no legal use for `Qjava/lang/Object;`.)

While Valhalla has had `L` and `Q` descriptors since the beginning, their
interpretations have gone through substantial evolution.  Initially the
distinction was pointer vs. flat; then it was nullable vs. not; then it was
"traditional" vs. "exotic", and finally it has come to land at object reference
vs. bare value. This final landing may seem superficially similar to where we
started (pointer vs. flat), but there is a significant difference: pointer vs.
flat prescribes a particular _representation_, whereas reference vs. value
describes a _semantic_ distinction; from there we can derive the desired
representational properties.

Bare values have several major differences from references to value objects:

 - References to value objects, like all object references, can be null, whereas
   bare values cannot.  This allows a `Q` type to "work like an `int`",
   without troubling the JVM to represent a `null` value in a 32-bit integer.

 - Loads and stores of references are atomic with respect to each other, whereas
   loads and stores of sufficiently large bare values may tear under race, as
   is the case for `long` and `double`.

 - The JVM is required to load classes named in `Q` descriptors much earlier
   than those named by `L` descriptors.

 - Data structures _may not_ be circular if linked via `Q` descriptors: a class
   `C` cannot reference `QC;` in its layout, either directly or indirectly.
   References must be used to break circularities.

 - If the class operand of the `checkcast` bytecode is a reference type, then
   the class is only loaded if the operand is non-null.  But if it is a `Q`
   type, then the class is eagerly loaded in any case.  (This affects the order
   of error processing and also applies the eager processing of `Q` types more
   consistently.)

 - `L` descriptor names participate in class loader constraints; `Q` descriptor
   names need not, if they are resolved during preparation.  (Because of eager
   loading, the constraints can be checked using resolved classes when methods
   are prepared.  JVM implementations which resolve `Q` descriptors more lazily
   must use class loader constraints on them.)

The expectation is that bare values will routinely be flattened in object and
array layouts, and in calling conventions between methods.  Perhaps
surprisingly, _references to_ value objects can also be flattened under some
conditions as well, though their stronger semantic guarantees (nullity,
non-tearability) will have some costs.  In particular, a flattened reference may
need to allocate an extra bit somewhere to differentiate between `null` and
non-null references.

### Eager loading

In most cases, the JVM is lazy about loading classes referred to by other
classes, such as classes named in method and field descriptors or in
`CONSTANT_Class` items.  However, the JVM ensures that a class's superclass, and
its implemented interfaces, are loaded eagerly during the loading of a class.

Valhalla adds two new triggers for eager class loading.  Any class referred to
via `Q` descriptor in the descriptor of a method or field declaration is eagerly
loaded in a roughly similar manner to supertypes.  Additionally, any classes
identified in the `Preload` attribute on a class are preloaded in a similar
manner.

```
Preload {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u2 number_of_types;
    u1 preload_types[number_of_types];
}
```

These additional preload triggers are present so that by the time we have to
make layout decisions for references to value objects, or for bare values, we
have complete information about these classes.  (As a result, applications are
at greater risk of _bootstrap circularities_ because of increased preloading.)

The exact timing of preloading either `Q` descriptors or `Preload` classes is
implementation dependent.  For `Q` descriptors, loading must take place early
enough to correctly execute structural checks such as the one for layout
circularity.  It _should_ take place early enough to give the JVM enough
information to optimize layouts of bare values and value references in places
like fields (both instance and static fields) and method calling sequences
(arguments and returns).

(Preloading, like class loading in general, should not be confused with the
initialization actions that are required when a class is first instantiated or
when one of its static members is resolved.)

A name appearing on a `Preload` attribute suggests to the JVM that an `L`
descriptor of that name describes a candidate for optimization (a field,
argument, or return), roughly as if a `Q` type had been observed in that
location, but with the proviso that a true reference must be implemented (`null`
and circularity are allowed but tearing is not).  Simple value classes such as
`Optional` are expected to benefit from this treatment, whether or not they
support bare values in addition to object references.

Nevertheless, the mere presence of a type on the `Preload` list does not entail
any correctness checks or other required side effects.  If preloading some name
fails for any reason, or fails to reveal a value class, the JVM simply falls
back to the normal `L` type contract.  Thus, the `Preload` attribute is a more
of a hint than a command.  By contrast, the loading required by the appearance
of a `Q` type in a declared field or method is required, and may produce errors.

The timing of class initialization (execution of `<clinit>` methods) is also
affected by the presence of `Q` descriptors.  A default instance of a primitive
class `Foo` is created whenever a variable of type `QFoo;` is created.  This
means that before an array of type `[QFoo;` is created, and before an object
containing a non-static field of type `QFoo;` is created, the class `Foo` must
be initialized.  Also, before a static field of type `QFoo;` is first
referenced, again `Foo` must be initialized.  (This might be when the class
containing the static field is prepared, or more likely just before the
containing class is initialized.)  There are no corresponding requirements for
`LFoo;`.

### Nullity and default values

Object references may be null, which means `L`-described variables must be able
to represent null.  The JVM has complete latitude over how to represent null
references.  For identity classes, where pointers are effectively a forced move
for representing references, the null pointer is the obvious representation.

For value classes that are going to be flattened, an alternate representation
must be chosen.  Where the JVM can identify an unused bit or bit pattern (such
as slack bits in pointers or booleans), it can use these to encode null; in the
worst case, it can inject additional bits into the layout.

Heap variables -- fields and array elements -- must be initialized to default
values before they are initialized or read by user code.  For all reference
types, the default value is `null`.  Meanwhile, the built-in primitives each
have their own form of "zero" which acts as a default value.  For bare values,
the default value is the one for which each field is initialized to its default
value.

### Constructors and unnamed factory methods

Both identity classes and value classes have constructors at the source level,
but they translate differently.  In a value class, each constructor is
translated to an _unnamed factory method_ (named `<new>`) with the same argument
list as the declared constructor.  While an `<init>` method (formally called an
_instance initialization method_) operates on a partially-built receiver
instance and must return `void`, a factory method simply returns the object
being constructed.

A value class may not define an `<init>` method.  (Interfaces also have this
restriction.)  Also, while an `<init>` method must always be non-static, a
`<new>` method must always be static.

A `<new>` method must return the type of its declaring class, or a supertype.
If the declaring class supports `Q` types (is marked `ACC_PRIMITIVE`) the return
type may be the `Q` type of that class, or (as with regular value classes) an
appropriate `L` type.  An unnamed factory method for a primitive _usually_
returns the `Q` type of its class, and for a non-primitive value class it
_usually_ returns the `L` type.  (Returning other types is a necessary option
for hidden value classes, and may be useful in other specialized translation
strategies.)

While `<new>` methods must always be static and must return a type consistent
with their class, they can (unlike `<init>` methods) be declared in any class
file, as far as the JVM is concerned.  (Remember that the Java language per se
knows only about constructors, not about `<init>` or `<new>` methods.)  This
design allows possible future translation strategies to use unnamed factory
methods in other kinds of class files besides value classes.

### Supertypes

Value classes may implement interfaces, and may extend certain restricted
abstract classes and notably the special class `Object`.  This means that a
variable of an interface type, or of a suitable abstract class type, or of the
type `Object`, may be a reference to _either_ an identity object or a value
object.

For an interface to be compatible with value classes, no special marking is
required either in the source code or in its class file.  But a class file for
an abstract class (that is, a non-interface) must explicitly opt into the
possibility of subclasses that are value classes.  In essence, such a class file
must certify that its no-argument `<init>` method is _skippable_ by the
constructors of its `ACC_VALUE` subclasses.

Since the static factory `<new>` of a value class does not call any superclass
constructor `<init>`, it must be safe to skip the superclass constructor call.
Whether this is true or not is a matter to be decided by the author of the
abstract class.  A class which opts into value subclasses is called a
_value-superclass candidate_.  When compiled, it is marked with the
`ACC_PERMITS_VALUE` flag.  If that flag is present, then the JVM checks these
additional conditions when the class is loaded:

  - It must be marked `ACC_ABSTRACT` as well as `ACC_PERMITS_VALUE`.

  - It may not also be marked `ACC_INTERFACE`.

  - Its superclass (if any) must also be marked `ACC_PERMITS_VALUE`.

  - It may not declare any non-static `ACC_SYNCHRONIZED` methods.

  - It may not declare any non-static fields.  (Probably.)

The requirements of being a value-superclass candidate are thus "contagious" up
the superclass chain.  In effect, if some abstract class has a skippable no-arg
constructor, its immediate superclass must _also_ have an skippable no-arg
constructor, all the way up to `Object`.

Perhaps surprisingly, the JVM does not perform the following checks for
value-superclass candidates, although the source language compiler will
typically do so:

  - It should have declared an empty no-argument constructor.  (Or if it didn't,
    then the author has somehow consented to having all of the constructors
    being skipped by the unnamed factory methods of value subclasses.)

  - It should not implement the `IdentityObject` marker interface.  (Or if it
    did, it is a "perpetual candidate" in the sense that the JVM will never
    successfully load an `ACC_VALUE` subclass.)

### The special case of `Object`

Like interfaces, `Object` commits to neither kind of class; it implements
neither of the marker interfaces `IdentityObject` nor `ValueObject`.  Yet the
existing behavior of the expression `new Object()` creates an identity object.
The JVM will give special treatment to the bytecode instruction `new
java/lang/Object`, which after link resolution will create an identity object of
a secret substitute class which has no fields (like `Object`) and implements
`IdentityObject`.  (The verifier does not have to know about this, and the
subsequent `invokespecial` of `Object::<init>` will be the only initialization
the object ever experiences. This secret class will be designed to allow this
treatment.)

In order for the various rules about supers to apply correctly, the class
`Object` must also be marked with the flag `ACC_PERMITS_VALUE`, and must not
declare instance fields.

### Marker interfaces

When a non-interface class file is loaded, the JVM may dynamically inject one of
the two marker interfaces `ValueObject` or `IdentityObject`, so that all
concrete classes will implement one of those interfaces as appropriate.

A marker interface is not injected if it is already present, either directly in
the interfaces of the class file, or indirectly via the superclass or an
interface.

Specifically:

  - If the class is a value class, `ValueObject` is injected if not present.

  - Or, if the class is not a value class and not abstract, `IdentityObject` is
    injected if not present.

  - Or, if an abstract class is not a value-superclass candidate and it has at
    least one `<init>` method, `IdentityObject` is injected if not
    present. (Such a class has closed down the option of having value
    subclasses.)

  - Or, if an abstract class is a value-superclass candidate and it has no
    `<init>` methods, `ValueObject` is injected if not present.  (Such a class
    has closed down the option of having identity subclasses.)

After injection (if any), any concrete class, abstract class, or interface that
attempts to implement both marker interfaces will be rejected by the JVM.

In the end, every object will implement exactly one of the two markers, and it
will implement `ValueObject` if and only if its class was a value class.

(The rules for dynamically injecting `IdentityObject` are required for
compatibility with older classfiles, where the source compiler cannot have known
about the need for `IdentityObject`.  In principle there is no need for the JVM
to inject `ValueObject`, since the compiler can be required to perform that
injection statically, and the same is true when recompiling identity classes.
But given the need for dynamic injection in one case, it seems useful to specify
it symmetrically for all of the above cases.)

A marker interface injected by the JVM is indistiguishable from one explicitly
declared in the class file.  Thus, JVM-inserted supers are visible to reflection
via `Class::getInterfaces` and `Class::isAssignableFrom`, and respected by
`checkcast`, `instanceof`, `aastore`, `Class::isInstance`, and `Class::cast`.

### Other restrictions

Value classes come with some additional restrictions compared to their identity
counterparts.

  - The direct superclass of a value class must be a value-superclass candidate.

  - As noted above, `IdentityObject` must not be present directly or indirectly.

  - Instance fields of a value class must be marked `ACC_FINAL`, and must not be
    marked `ACC_VOLATILE`.

  - The instance fields of a value class `Foo` may not, either directly or
    indirectly, have a field of type `Foo` using a `Q` descriptor.

  - In any class file, neither fields nor methods may be declared with `Q`
    types, nor may a `Q` type be otherwise resolved, if the class of the `Q`
    type is not marked `ACC_PRIMITIVE`.  (When the JVM loads the class of a `Q`
    type, it ensures that the class file properly declares a primitive type.)

A `Q` descriptor requires a check on the corresponding class file; its contract
is strict in that way.  There is no corresponding check for an `L` descriptor,
because its contract is lax.

If an object were to contain a `Q`-typed instance field of its own class, it
would have no definite size; each object would contain an infinite regression of
sub-objects of the same type.  A similar point goes for indirect declaration
cycles, such as where `Foo` contains `QBar;` and `Bar` contains `QFoo;` again.
In practice, an `L` type can be instead of a `Q` type, stopping any infinite
regress with a `null` reference.

A `static` field of type `Foo` using a `Q` descriptor in `Foo` is not
problematic, although it requires careful preparation, and (in general) a hidden
indirection to manage lazy initialization.  Such `static` fields of type `QFoo;`
must be initialized to the default value of `Foo`, but the JVM may need to
prepare such static fields before the default value is materialized, which may
possibly require lazy or indirect access to the field.  (This will be the case
if the static field value is materialized after the containing class is
prepared, when it is later initialized.)  If so, this internal logic can be
hidden within the `getstatic` bytecode.

### Static translation

The translation of Java classes which declare and use value classes requires
minor adjustments to the current translation strategy.

Value classes that are not primitive classes require no change in translation;
these are translated with `L` descriptors.  Similarly, the reference companion
type of a primitive class is translated with `L` descriptors, and primitive
value types are translated with `Q` descriptors.  Widening and narrowing
conversions between `Q` and `L` types are performed with `checkcast`.

Instantiation of value classes (`new V(...)`) is translated as invocation of the
corresponding unnamed factory method with `invokestatic`.  In the body of the
factory method, rather than accepting an uninitialized `this` as a parameter,
`this` is initialized inside the body of the factory with `aconst_init`,
assignments to fields of `this` are translated as modifying that value with
`withfield`, and the factory returns the completed `this`.

Despite the oddity of `Object` (or perhaps because of it), client code that uses
`Object` does not need to be translated any differently.

Conversions between bare primitives and reference values, like their
predecessors the boxing and unboxing conversions, require explicit bytecodes.
(This is true even when they can be implicit in the language, as between `int`
and `Integer`, or `Point` and `Point.ref`.)  For primitive classes, this is
simply a `checkcast` in either direction, as differentiated by the presence of a
`Q` descriptor or plain class name in the `checkcast` constant operand.  For
legacy primitives like `int`, the JVM will continue to require calls to methods
like `Integer::valueOf` and `Integer::value`.  (We could also create new
bytecodes to bridge these gaps, but that does not appear to be worthwhile.)

## Bytecodes and constants

The incorporation of value classes, and of `Q` descriptors, affects a number of
bytecodes.  Some are new, and others gain additional behavior or restrictions
when applied to primitive types.  The existing `a*` bytecodes are extended to
uniformly support references to both identity and value classes.

(A note about the term "reference": To the JVM, and specifically the bytecode
verifier, "reference" is a catch-all type; it is anything other than an int,
long, float, or double, the kind of thing you hand to an `a*` bytecode.  Thus it
can be either a `Q` type or `L` type.  What the language translates to `L`
types are properly called references in the Java language.  But what translates
to `Q` types are not Java language references but bare primitive values.
This cognitive dissonance can perhaps be assuaged by
substituting the term "address" or "anything" for "reference" in the JVM
specification, or at least by remembering that the JVMS and JLS have separate
bodies of terminology.)

There are two new bytecode instructions used for constructing instances of
value classes.

 - `aconst_init` is the analogue of `new` for value objects; it leaves a
   reference to the initial value for a value class on the stack.  This initial
   value is guaranteed to not be equal to `null`.  The sole operand of this
   bytecode is a reference to a `CONSTANT_Class` item giving the internal binary
   name of the value class (not its `Q` descriptor).

 - `withfield` is the analogue of `putfield` for value objects; it takes a
   reference to a value object and a new field value on the stack, and leaves  a
   reference on the stack to an instance of the value class whose fields are all
   the same as the original instance, except for the specified field.

Both `withfield` and `aconst_init` return a `Q` type if and only if their class
is a primitive class.  Both `getfield` and `withfield` accept either `Q` types
or `L` types if the receiver class is primitive; there is no need for a
`checkcast`.  (These niceties are applications of Postel's Law.)

Both the `aconst_init` and `withfield` instruction are restricted and can only
be executed within the nest of the class that declares the value class being
initialized or modified.  This encapsulates creation of novel values, so the
class can ensure that any value escaping the implementation is seen to adhere to
its invariants.  The `new` and `putfield` bytecodes may not be used with
instances of primitive classes, and the `withfield` bytecode may not be used
with identity classes.  (In a future version of a JVM, we may allow a class to
grant access to these restricted instructions to other clients, on an opt-in
basis, if this seems useful.)

The `anewarray` instruction is similarly extended to apply to a `Q` descriptor;
this determines whether the resulting array may be flattened (`Q`), in which case it
is an array of bare values, or not (`L`).  The `anewarray` instruction
returns a plain (`L`) reference to an array regardless of its component type.

The `aastore` instruction performs a null check on the element value before
storing a value into an array of bare values.  The `aaload` instruction, as
always, takes an array of a particular reference element type, and returns an
element of that type.  If the array element type is a `Q` type, the value pushed
on the stack by `aaload` is tracked by the verifier as a `Q` type.  The
`aastore` instruction, as always, relies fully on the dynamic array store check;
the verifier is indifferent to the precise component type of the array input to
`aastore`.

The `acmp*` instructions perform a more sophisticated comparison between their
operands.  Two object references are considered "the same" if they are both
`null`, are both references to the same identity object, or are both references
to primitive objects of the same type where all of their fields are pairwise the
same.  "Pairwise the same" means recursively applying a suitable equality
comparison to the fields, which for references checks if they are the same
(using `acmp` again, recursively), and for the primitives checks for bitwise
equality.  "Bitwise equality" for `float` and `double` fields uses the semantics
of `Float::equals` and `Double::equals`, and for the other primitives is just
ordinary equality.

The `checkcast` instruction is extended to apply to a `Q` descriptor, with the
existing `checkcast` interpreted as following the rules for `L` descriptors.  A
`checkcast` with a `Q` descriptor differs from the traditional semantics, in
that the class constant is resolved even if the object reference is null.

The `ldc` instruction, applied to a `CONSTANT_Class` item which contains a `Q`
descriptor, will return the secondary (bare) mirror for the class.  The normal
syntax (of a plain class name in a `CONSTANT_Class` item) will return the mirror
for the reference type; again, it is as if the normal syntax works like an `L`
descriptor.  The resolution of bootstrap method arguments continues to be
consistent with the behavior of `ldc`.

Most uses of `CONSTANT_Class` continue to require plain class names, not array
descriptors or `Q` descriptors.  A `CONSTANT_Class` item that specifies `Q`
descriptor is valid only for the following uses:

 - as a loadable constant: an operand of `ldc` or a bootstrap method
 - as an operand of `checkcast` or `anewarray`
 - in a stack map table for the verifier (to distinguish `L` and `Q` types)

In particular, `CONSTANT_Fieldref`, `CONSTANT_Methodref`, and
`CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref` items and `instanceof` instructions must not refer
to `CONSTANT_Class` items with `Q` descriptors.

### Arrays

An array type is a reference type (using the `L` contract) generated from a
descriptor beginning with `[`.  The addition of `Q` descriptors simply implies
that an array element type can be either `L` or `Q`, corresponding to a choice
between an array of references, or an array of bare values.

An array of bare values loads values of the corresponding `Q`-carried type. A
reference value of any kind (whether `Q` or `L` or null or array) may be
presented to the `aastore` instruction to store into the flattened array, but
the store check will apply the same logic as `checkcast` to ensure that the
incoming value can actually be stored as a bare value. 

Arrays of reference types are covariant; if `C` is a subtype of `D`, then `[LC;`
is a subtype of `[LD;`.  For primitive classes, we extend this covariance such
that an array of bare values is seen as a subtype of an array of references of
the corresponding type: `[QX;` is a subtype of `[LX;` (and, since reference
arrays are covariant, `[QX;` is transitively a subtype of `[LObject;`.)  In
short, the JVM replicates the language level rule, that `A[] <: B[]` if and only
if `A extends B` (not just `A <: B`), recalling that `A extends B` means either
`A <: B` or `A.ref <: B`.

The same consideration will be given to the eight primitive types and their
wrappers; `[I` is a subtype of `[LInteger;`, and `int` extends `Integer` and
`Object`.  It seems likely that we will contrive somehow that `int extends
Integer` and `int[] <: int.ref[] <: Object[]`, with JVM support for these
subtype relations among array references.

### Structure tearing

With the exception of `long` and `double`, loads and stores of references and
built-in primitives to and from the heap are atomic with respect to each other.
This provides protection against _out of thin air_ reads; even in the presence
of data races, a load of a variable will yield a value that _some_ thread has
put there (perhaps the default value), even if it is not the _most recent_ value
written to that variable.  This, in turn, provides the underpinnings of
_initialization safety_ (JCiP 16.3), which allows properly constructed immutable
objects to be shared across threads, even in the presence of data races.  (Without
this guarantee, it would be possible to observe the value of a `String` change
unexpectedly.)

The larger-than-32-bit built-in primitives (`long` and `double`) are permitted
to _tear_ in a controlled way under race; absent proper coordination, a reader
may see the high-order 32 bits of one write, and the low-order 32 bits of
another write.  Any _happens-before_ ordering between writes and reads, such as
making the variable `volatile`, is sufficient to inhibit tearing.  Allowing
tearing for numerics was a pragmatic tradeoff given the hardware of the day
(today's JVM's typically don't tear even when they are allowed to, because
64-bit atomicity is cheap enough.)  For the built-in 64-bit primitives, tearing
is inconvenient but in practicality has a limited impact; numeric-intensive code
tends to not make extensive use of contended sharing.

While reads and writes of references are still atomic, meaning that we will not
see tearing for `L`-carried values, the same forces push us to allowing tearing
on larger bare values.  Thus, a thread can witness an "impossible"
combination of fields in a bare value, given the right (or wrong!) race
condition.  Since primitive classes may want to carefully control their internal
invariants, structure tearing can cause new kinds of failures if it violates
those invariants; this is often a cue to use value classes rather than primitive
classes.

Structure tearing may not appear on some platforms.  On other platforms it may
be rare, although mischievous code might force it to happen on command.  In any
case, tearing cannot be ruled out absolutely.  Java provides several means of
ensuring tear-freedom; declare the field `volatile`, or use a reference rather
than a bare value.  (The former is only available for fields; array elements
must choose the latter.)  The JVM then excludes tearing by any means it chooses:
Software transactions, hardware locking, hidden synchronization, extra
buffering, or some combination of the above.

### Legacy primitives

As discussed in [Language Model](02-object-model.html), a key goal is to migrate
the built-in primitives so that they are "mostly just" primitive classes, while
retaining the performance characteristics of the built-in primitives.  The
existing wrapper classes (e.g., `Integer`) are redefined as value classes. We
treat `int.ref` as an alias for `Integer`.

The JVM will, of course, continue to have direct support for primitives (e.g.,
the `I` carrier, and the `i*` instructions).  The language compiler will have
substantial latitude to translate uses of `int` to use the `I` carrier and
instructions in generated code where beneficial (and where required for
migration compatibility, such as in field and method descriptors).

This scheme involves one behaviorally incompatible change to wrapper class
behaviors: synchronization on an instance of one of the primitive wrapper
classes will throw `IMSE`.  While we do not take this lightly, it is almost
universally an error to do this, and in the very few cases where this is not an
outright error, simple workarounds exist.  A similar error of using a wrapper
class constructor (in `new Integer(42) != 42`) is already flagged with a
deprecation warning.

It may be that a descriptor like `Qjava/lang/int;` or `Qjava/lang/Integer;` will
be useful later when describing specializations over primitives, although it
seems more likely that a dynamical mirror value like `int.class` will fufill
that role.  Conversions between `int` and `Integer` probably do not need to
change from their present form in bytecode, even around specialized generic
code.  Our current thinking is that the complicating effects of specialization
on generic code are not likely to change the form of the bytecode.
Instead, the effects of specialization will probably be
carried by a new side channel which accompanies the bytecode, of dynamically
specified and resolved "type restrictions", which are distinct from JVM type
descriptors as bytecode operands, visible to the verifier.

### Verification

The verifier keeps track of the "flavor" of each reference value (`L` vs. `Q`)
as derived from the descriptor at its source.  `L` and `Q` references may be
interconverted by the use of the `checkcast` instruction; a non-null `LX;` can
be converted to a `QX;`, and a `QX;` can always be converted to an `LX;` or one
of its supertypes.

The verifier tracks `Q`-carried values, deriving them from from the following
sources:

 - any `Q` descriptors in the argument types of the current method
 - the `invoke` family (when the return value is a `Q` type)
 - `getfield`, `getstatic` (when the field is a `Q` type)
 - `aconst_init`, `withfield` (always produces a `Q` type for primitive classes)
 - `aaload` (when the array component type is a `Q` type)
 - `checkcast` (when the `CONSTANT_Class` operand is a `Q` descriptor)
 - `ldc` (when the constant is a `Q` type)

The verifier enforces the `Q` marking of values when it sends them to
the following consumers:

 - `areturn` (when the return value is a `Q` type)
 - the `invoke` family (any `Q` descriptors for outgoing arguments)
 - `putfield`, `putstatic`, `withfield` (when the _field_ is a `Q` type)

In some cases the JVM uses dynamic checks to ensure type safety, and the
verifier does not enforce marking of `Q` types for these consumers, but rather
accepts `Q` and `L` marked types indiscriminately:

 - the receiver of `getfield`, `putfield`, `withfield`, and the
   `invoke` family (these already include a mandatory `null` check)
 - `aastore` (this has always been purely dynamic)
 - `checkcast` (`Q` promotes to `L`, which is then cast)

In the verifier, the `null` type is a subtype of every plain (`L` descriptor)
type, but is not a subtype of any `Q` type.  (Note that as a result of these
rules, every `Q`-carried value is sourced from either a previous `Q`-carried
value, or else is the result of a `checkcast`.  These rules are sufficient to
ensure that stray `null` value can be excluded eagerly in the interpreter,
before they would pass into fields that are flattened or method arguments that
are scalarized, and even before an optimizer begins to scalarize calling
sequences.)

In the verifier, a type `QFoo;` has no subtypes or supertypes at all.  In this a
`Q` type is unlike `LFoo;`, which implicitly converts to `LObject;` and other
reference types.  Instead, a `Q` type is treated by the verifier like the
primitive types `J`, `F`, `D`, which have no implicit conversions.

(A less conservative design would allow the verifier to implicitly promote
`QFoo;` to `LFoo;` and then to any supertype; this would allow some uses of
`checkcast` to be elided, and would slightly refactor the JVM specification.
The present design emphasizes the abstractness of all `Q` types, even relative
to their associated `L` types, and also follows the language rules more closely.
In the design for primitive types in Java, although `Point` _extends_
`Point.ref` and `Object` and can be converted to those types by "value
conversion", `Point` is not a reference type, nor is it a _subtype_ of .)

### Reflection

When a class is reflected, its field and method types directly represent the
corresponding descriptors by using a distinct mirror (of type `Class`) for each
distinct descriptor.  (There are even mirrors for `int` and `void`!)  And since
a primitive class `Foo` can appear with either kind of descriptor (`L` or `Q`),
it follows there must be two mirrors associated with any primitive class `Foo`.
The source types are denoted `Foo.ref` and `Foo`, which are translated as
`LFoo;` and `QFoo;`, and likely mirrored as `Foo.ref.class` and `Foo.class`.
(Or, maybe, something like `Foo.class` and `Foo.TYPE`, depending on which type
gets the "good name" `Foo.class`.) The JVM generates both mirrors automatically
when loading a primitive class.

In all paths through the reflective APIs which classically (before Valhalla)
yield class mirrors, the JVM will continue to return `ref` mirrors.  This is
more compatible than returning the "more accurate" value.  The situation is
similar, in some ways, to that of `Integer.class` and `int.class`, if one can
imagine that `Integer` works like `int.ref`, and that `I` is really (somehow) a
`Q`-like descriptor.

In particular, `Class::forName` and `Object::getClass` will always return a
`ref` projection.  If you want the mirror that "works like `int.class`", you
have to look somewhere special, as with `int` today, or ask the primary mirror
for its corresponding secondary mirror.  There will be an API point on `Class`
for obtaining the `val` mirror from the `ref` mirror, and vice versa.

### Hashing follows equality

As described above, the `acmp` bytecode performs pairwise equivalence tests on
the fields of two value objects (of the same class).  This implies that the
method `Object::equals` performs the same test, since the definition of that
method simply compares `this` and the argument for sameness (using `==`).

The methods `Object::hashCode` and `System::identityHashCode` are tightly
coupled to the behavior of `Object::equals` and `acmp`, so their behavior needs
to be adjusted correspondingly.  It seems highly likely that every value class
should adhere to the older rules for [value-based classes], and not make use of
those hardwired hash code methods; perhaps the language should enforce this.

It is less clear what to do when a value object is intentionally presented to
`System::identityHashCode`.  Returning a hash of an underlying heap pointer
would be very wrong, breaking the contract that hash codes of equal objects must
themselves be equal.  There are a number of formally correct options:

  - Return a constant value -1, or the hash of the object's class.  This may be
    surprising to authors of identity hash maps, who rely on reasonable
    collision rates for hash codes.  (But perhaps they should fix their code?)

  - Throw an exception, something like "Error: there is no identity in this
    value object."  This would tend to break bits of code that try to treat
    value objects as identity objects, a surprise to users of identity hash
    maps.  (But perhaps their vendors should fix their code?)

  - Create an ad hoc hash code of the object's fields.  This is acceptable in
    many use cases, but is also likely to be an escalating maintenance burden,
    since varying uses demand qualities of hash which vary from fast to
    thorough.  As a rough band-aid fix, the JVM as a whole could have some
    configuration switch to choose between (say) bitwise XOR and xxHash.

[value-based classes]: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/doc-files/ValueBased.html

### Reachability

Like one of today's `Integer` objects, a value object may be used as a key to a
weak hash map.  (There are many such in the Java ecosystem.)  The implementation
of a weak hash map probably appeals to the `WeakReference` JDK class or
something similar.  In any case, applications make varying use of
`WeakReference` and related types, as well as JNI weak references.  It appears
that we cannot exclude value objects from such uses, and so we need to assign a
meaning to a weak reference to a value object.

What does it mean to wait for a value object to become unreachable?  If the
primitive object is simply a bit-pattern of scalars, the unhappy answer is that
it is alway reachable in principle, since the bit-pattern could be read from
disk, loaded into a fresh copy of the value object, and presented as a witness
of reachability.  After all, a reference is reachable if some other code can
produce a reference which `acmp` will compare as indistinguishable ("the same")
from the original reference.  But `acmp` on a value object pays attention only
to object state, not identity.

If a value object is composed of a combination of scalars and references to
identity objects, the problem is less hopeless, though still complicated. A
value object becomes unreachable (in the modified definition of the previous
paragraph) if and only if _at least one_ of its component identity object
references becomes unreachable.

It seems possible to implement this standard of reachability for value objects
using a combination of GC adjustments, JDK library changes to `WeakReference`,
and runtime code changes for JNI weak references. It also seems terribly
inconvenient to do this, and we are looking for use cases to help us weigh the
alternatives, such as refusing to build such `WeakReference`s (forcing library
authors to recode) or just holding on to value objects forever.

## Flattening and representation

It was clearly a goal of Valhalla to enable the flattening of bare values.
Given the constraints on primitive classes, flattening bare values in the heap,
and in calling conventions, is straightforward; we can replace a bare value with
its component fields whenever it is convenient to do so, and reassemble them
into a value object where needed.

Perhaps surprisingly, it is also possible to flatten some object references.
Historically, object references were always represented as pointers.  Because
all objects had identity, there was really no other practical option; objects
with identity live in exactly one place, and a pointer is the ideal way to
record this. Similarly, when the referent is polymorphic (such as a reference to
an interface type) and all the possibilities are identity objects, a pointer is
again the natural representation.

When the type of the referent is more constrained, and the referent is known to
have no identity, alternate representations become possible. An object without
identity is just its (immutable) state (including its typestate), and two
objects with the same type and state are indistinguishable.  This means that it
becomes possible to flatten references into their referred-to state.

There are a number of accidental reasons why we might not be able to flatten a
reference.  We might not have complete information about the range of types of
the referent (it could be a reference to an unsealed interface type).  And even
if it is a reference to a type that turns out to be monomorphic, we may not know
this at the time we are called upon to choose a representation.

Because the layout of references must frequently be chosen early (such as when
choosing the layout for a class containing the reference, which is done at class
preparation time), optimizations involving reference layout often require _early
loading_ of their referent type.  However, the JVM specification strongly
encourages us to defer the loading of classes described with `L` descriptors
until the latest possible time (when an instance is instantiated, or a static
member is accessed.)  Accordingly, to enable flattened representations of
references, we needed to arrange for earlier loading of the referent type.

Another consequence of flattening the layout of references is that an alternate
strategy for representing nullity is needed.  References are intrinsically
nullable (a reference needs a way to express "refers to nothing", to avoid
infinite regress when constructing objects), and therefore we need to ensure
that there is a way to represent null references.  If we are representing null
as a pointer, as we do for identity objects, this is easy: use a sentinel value
(such as the null pointer) to encode the null reference.  But if we are
flattening the referent into the reference encoding, we'll need at least one bit
pattern to represent null.  (In some cases we can find an empty bit pattern in
the representation, in which case we can do so without additional footprint
cost; otherwise we'll need to adjoin additional bits to the representation.)

### Flattenable contexts

References may appear in fields, method parameter and returns, and local
variables.  Each of these contexts has different constraints on the timing of
layout.  The layout of fields is done at the time the containing class is
prepared and is generally fixed thereafter.  The layout of method parameters and
return values is done either at preparation or else at the time the invocation
instruction is linked; they are similarly fixed thereafter, though it is
allowable for a method to support more than one calling convention.

Final fields containing value objects, under both `L` and `Q` descriptors, can
be routinely flattened.  Mutable fields containing value objects under `Q`
descriptors can be routinely flattened; mutable fields containing value objects
under `L` descriptors must provide atomic loads and stores, which requires
either atomic instructions or an indirection.  Atomicity for single-word classes
like `java.util.Optional` (after migration to a value class) is probably easier
to manage than multi-word classes.

When an array element or mutable instance field is of a `Q` type, the effect of
loading or storing a `Q` value is tracked by the Java Memory Model as if the
primitive object were recursively broken down into the component subfields of it
and all of its embedded sub-objects, all the way down to plain pointers and
scalar (non-object) primitives like `int` and `long`.  (In other words, a
flattened value in the heap is "scalarized", decomposed into a set of machine
words.)

Value objects as method parameters and returns, under both `L` and `Q`
descriptors, can use flattened calling conventions for out-of-line calls.
For inlined calls, JITs have virtually unlimited latitude to flatten (scalarize)
value objects under both `L` and `Q` descriptors.

In all cases, the JVM has the latitude to not flatten at its discretion.  For
value objects with many fields, the JVM may decide to fall back to buffering its
value in the heap, which is the traditional indirected representation.  Outside
of statically typed and optimized code -- in the interpreter or around
unspecialized polymorphic or reflected code -- heap buffering is not certain but
seems a likely prospect.
